Coordinated Leader Election to Beta (#5088)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-api-machinery/4355-coordinated-leader-election/README.md

-->

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- The strategy `OldestEmulationVersion` is implemented

> #### Beta

Reviewer: maybe for GA: can we load test this feature? Imagine we create 10000 leases and candidates. What happens?

Author: Added a section for GA

> - e2e tests

Reviewer: which do we know we would need?

Author: Added example list. Feel free to expand if its missing cases

- Lease pings are parallelized

> - Tests are included for third party strategies

Reviewer: is the section below correct?

> remove the flag or enable the alpha feature

Reads like "X or not X".

Author: Fixed. The mechanism should be completely based on the feature gate and API without other flags.

#### Beta

- e2e tests for coordinated leader election on various scenarios
  + single leasecandidate
  + multiple leasecandidates

>   + lease is preempted when another more suitable candidate is found

Reviewer: - old components that don't know about coordination, mixed with those that do
- downgrade to components that don't know about coordination (not sure about the overlap with the "disablement" test below).
- custom strategy controller.

Author: added

- Lease pings are parallelized
- Tests are included for third party strategies
- Tests for disablement of the feature gate

#### GA

- Load test Coordinated Leader Election
- Feature is enabled by default

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> Upgrading requires enabling the feature gate `CoordinatedLeaderElection` and the group version `coordination.k8s.io/v1alpha2`. Downgrading will revert to the old leader election mechanism, but may have extra data in etcd for `LeaseCandidate` objects under the `coordination.k8s.io/v1alpha2` group version.

Reviewer: now rereading the old sentence, it actually makes sense: when downgrading one cannot keep using the `--leader-elect-resource-lock=coordinatedleases` flag because it will error.

will rollout across nodes.
-->

Rollouts and rollbacks can fail in many ways. During the first rollout of the
feature, there will be a mixed state of control planes using and not using
coordinated leader election. Components not using CLE will race to obtain the
best leader while the ones using CLE will defer the CLE controller to assign
themselves as leader.

If the CLE controller has bugs, it may fail to or incorrectly select a leader
and could lead to disruptions.

If LeaseCandidate objects have incorrect version information, CLE controller may make an incorrect leader selection and potentially lead to version skew violations.

###### What specific metrics should inform a rollback?

<!--
What signals should users be paying attention to when the feature is young
that might indicate a serious problem?
-->

> If leases fail to renew that would ba sign for rollback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If leases fail to renew that would be a sign for rollback.
```

will rollout across nodes.
-->

Rollouts and rollbacks can fail in many ways. During the first rollout of the
feature, there will be a mixed state of control planes using and not using
coordinated leader election. Components not using CLE will race to obtain the
best leader while the ones using CLE will defer the CLE controller to assign

> themselves as leader.

Reviewer 2: But only one leader can ever be elected, correct?  Maybe clarify here.  The way this is phrased it's unclear what level of risk there is, but my understanding is that, while we don't guarantee _coordinated_ leader election, we still get leader election.

Author: Updated

logs or events for this purpose.
-->

> LeaseCandidate resource will be enabled and feature gate `CoordinatedLeaderElection` will be enabled.

Reviewer: Add how to see it on the Lease object.

Author: Added

###### What steps should be taken if SLOs are not being met to determine the problem?

> Check whether the CLE controller is operating properly, check if API server is

Reviewer: how? Any logs one can monitor?

Author: Added.

> not overloaded, and in the worst case disable the feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not overloaded, and in the worst case disable the feature by explicitly setting the feature gate to false.
```

We need an integration test that verifies this procedure. Please add above to the beta criteria.

Author: Added

    - Testing: Are there any tests for failure mode? If not, describe why.
-->

- Leader election controller fails to elect a leader
  - Detection: Via metrics `apiserver_coordinated_leader_election_failures_total` increasing and absence of leader in lease object
  - Mitigations: Operators can disable feature gate.
  - Diagnostics: Check kube-apiserver logs for messages on failing to elect the leader. Look at the lease object renewal times and holder, along with leasecandidate objects for the particular component.

>   - Testing: Integration test exists that prevents write access for the CLE controller and ensure that another controller takes over.

Reviewer: ensure**s**
